Ansible

Dis-advantages of shell script

1) shell-script will not work on all linux distributions
2) Scalability - difficult to manage more number of servers
3) Error handling and validations - need to be done manually
4) Readability
5) shell will work for linux, will not work with external systems

Ansible--> Configuration Management Tool

Ansible is an open-source automation tool used for

    Configuration management
    Application deployment
    Cloud provisioning and orchestration(But not recommended)

What is configuration?

-> To make server ready for application deployment is called configuring server

Before deploying the application we need to make the server ready. For example

    Installing packages
    Installing Programming languages
    Installing build tools.
    Installing Application Runtime.
    Creation of users, folders, etc.
    Setting permissions.
    Creation of systemctl services.

Deployment 
-------
1) Stop the server
2) remover the old code 
3) download new code 
4) restart the server

As a DevOps engineer we need to do this effectively. Basically CRUD over the server.

Creation of configuration --> should be fast and accurate
Update the configuration --> any changes in configuration should be rolled out asap.
Delete the configuration --> delete the configuration if not required.
Read the configuration --> it is easy to read the configuration of server through ansible playbooks.
Disadvantages of shell

    Does your shell script can work with all distributions? because command may change based on distribution.
    Suppose on big billion day we have 1000 servers. How can we configure servers?
    Is shell scripting effective for error handling?
    Is shell scripting easy to understand and read?
    How to manage sensitive information in shell scripts?
    How to integrate shell script with external systems like AWS, Azure, etc.

Ansible Features

    Platform independent --> will work with all distrubutions
    Scalable --> it can manage many servers
    Idempotence --> if you run the program multiple times, it should not create any damage
     Providing same result irrespective of no of executions is called Idempotence 
    Error Handling
    Readable and maintainable
    Vault --> used to store sensitive information ie .. passwords etc
    Rich modules
    Agent less

Pull vs Push configuration


PULL:

    Nodes should connect to the servers through agent software.
    Nodes should download the configuration periodically, say every 30min.
    Even there is no change in configuration, agents connect to servers that creates unnecessary traffic and data consumption.

PUSH:

    Unlike pull there is no need of agent installation.
    Whenever there is a change in configuration, server can push to the nodes directly.
    Ansible uses SSH authentication to connect to the servers.

Ansible --> push based architecture

chef --> pull based architecture

chef server
------------
-it should have extra component called agent
-Agent will continuously check the server for an update

Ansible
--------
-Ansible will push the configuration when ever there is an update
--------

Linux --> everything is a command 
ansible --> everything is module/collection

https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/collections/index_module.html--> ansible community modules to connect all the popular tools

In ansible Playbook loop "item" is a keyword  

ansible.cfg --> ansible configuration file

